One uncommon consensus right now is we
need to scale AI, the bigger the better.
Hundreds of billions are being spent in
hopes that we achieve AGI through
scaling, yet no matter how good LLMs
have become, they are still stuck
solving logical puzzles that we
ironically refer to as an AGI benchmark.
But in the opposite direction of this
scaling virus, a new fascinating idea
has emerged in the AI research field.
What if we just have a model that can
think and refine an answer until it is
confident you the answer. So, it all
started with this research called HRM,
short for Hierarchical Reasoning Model.
This model came out of nowhere and
suddenly became comparable or even
outperformed state-of-the-art LLMs from
OpenAI, xAI, Anthropic, and Gemini,
scoring a staggering 32% on ARC-AGI
benchmark and solving Sudoku on levels
that current LLMs can't even compete
with. But what's actually the highlight
about this HRM is that it is a model
with only 27 million parameters.
Million, not billion, by the way. With
GPT-4, which has a known parameter count
of at least 1 trillion parameters, 27
million parameters is like 35,000 times
smaller. Yet, it is going head-to-head
with the giants on this AGI benchmark.
This sentence alone is already clickbait
enough. Of course, the community would
go wild when this just came out. But it
got even crazier. Another improved
version called TRM, short for Tiny
Recursion Model, was published 1 month
later that stretches the performance
while being four times smaller than HRM.
So, what is going on? Has scaling AI
always been the wrong direction? Well,
today I'll be demystifying this
hierarchical or recursive model for you,
as we'll find out how this recursion
model actually works, how impactful this
model really is, and what it could mean
for the future of AI paradigm. And
before I dive into it, with how fast AI
research is advancing, but how slow the
public is adopting AI, there has never
been a better time to ship an app or
start an AI business. But starting a
business isn't easy. What's a viable
idea, a sustainable business model, or
simply what would actually work? These
are all the questions you may have when
starting out. Well, there is a faster
way, which is to learn from what's
already working. Especially if you're
looking to learn from real examples,
this free playbook from HubSpot called
the AI business playbook shows you seven
AI companies that turn simple ideas into
millions. Inside, you would understand
and see how a 16-year-old turned a
camera-to-calories demo into a 24
million ARR app in 10 months by
advertising very will also see how a
college writing co-pilot grew to
millions of users by zooming into
citations and plagiarism checks instead
of trying to be the everything writer.
And my favorite part is how it breaks
down the patterns across all these
companies, like how they all used
existing AI tools and just focused on
solving real problems. So, if you want
to closer look at how people are making
successful AI apps, check out this free
playbook using the link down in the
description, and thank you, HubSpot, for
sponsoring this video. Anyways, the
illusion of the ARC-AGI benchmark is
that it makes every model competing on
this benchmark seems like they are all
on similar capabilities to LLMs like
ChatGPT, being able to solve math
questions, writing scientific essays,
and trade crypto at 20 times the
leverage. But in fact, there are models
on here that are not language models.
With it being solely made to solve
puzzles in a highly restrictive domain
like ARC-AGI. If you don't know what
ARC-AGI is, it is this benchmark where
AI has to find a pattern in some example
grids and predict how a given grid would
look like by understanding the example
pattern, very similar to what you would
see on IQ tests. And unlike other
language models, these tiny recursive
models are trained specifically to solve
a task like ARC-AGI and other logical
puzzles. Its in and outputs are just the
color grid itself, and it is incapable
of generating words or do other fancy
stuff, which you could say that we did
not arrive at some sort of
superintelligence. But what researchers
actually discovered is a highly
efficient model that excels at solving
logical problems under a highly
restrictive and clearly defined
rule-based setting. So, if you compare
it apple to apple with a generalizable
monster of an AI god that can understand
natural language and do pretty much
anything, which many people believe are
conscious and is going to destroy
everything eventually, it doesn't make
much sense, right? So, let's step back a
bit. What's actually really impressive
about recursive model is that it proved
hard logical problems aren't a domain
only solvable by LLMs. Small models are
capable, too. And the highlight is no
other small models have ever come close
to performance this crazy. So, how does
it achieve this? The idea first gained
attention with the release of HRM, short
for Hierarchical Reasoning Model. It
doesn't really explicitly say that it's
a recursive model, but the logic is
similar. And this paper kind of just
blew up as the research was able to
achieve 32% on ARC-AGI, which is a
better score than Claude 4 Opus and
GPT-5 mini low. And it also achieved a
2% on ARC-AGI, too. All this with only
27 million parameters, it's able to
solve all those questions thanks to its
recursive property. It tries to reason
internally instead of predicting
everything in one forward pass. Like if
an LLM has to calculate 1 + 1, it can
only spend the same effort to compute
the equal sign and the answer, too. But
it is obvious that the computational
effort isn't the same for both of these
tokens, right? So, what HRM does
differently is that throughout its
internal steps, it keeps an internal
latent state that represents the
reasoning process, which will be
repeatedly refined into an output. So,
when a calculation requires more effort,
it'll be allocated accordingly. And this
is achieved by using two different
networks that run at different speeds.
One low-level network, which would
update fast, and another high-level
network that would update at a lower
frequency. More specifically, it works
by having the fast network tweak a
hidden scratchpad a little bit every
microstep by using the current input and
the current provisional answer. And
after several fast tweaks, the slow
network wakes up, resets that
scratchpad, and makes a bigger strategic
adjustment to steer what the fast one
will do next. The slow part also
consults a halting head to decide
whether to keep going or stop. This
alternation continues with low-level
network refines details, high-level
network sets directions, and checks if
the answer looks done. For training,
right before running through a
high-level loop, the method will wait
for the fast loop to settle to a stable
state, then computes gradients as though
it is stable, instead of backpropagating
every microstep to save compute. At
runtime, it still performs a small
number of these fast-slow cycles on the
actual example and uses the halting head
to pick when to stop and read out the
final answer. These two networks work
together just like the temporal
separation of our brain, which the
author took inspiration from. With the
design being tied to how our brain has a
multi-timescale cortical process and
hierarchical depth, hence the name
hierarchical reasoning. The paper even
adds a brain correspondence section that
compares HRM's representational
dimensionality against mouse cortex in
order to justify their design choice,
which I'll get to later. While this idea
was well received, especially with how
well it performed empirically, some
researchers are still a bit dissatisfied
about the ambiguity that the HRM paper
has. A heavy use of heuristics were
applied on quite a few things, with the
biggest iffy points being like
justifying this two-timescale design
with biology, and perhaps drawing
similarity to a mouse brain may be too
big of a reach, as the similarity is not
proven mechanistically nor empirically.
With the main reason behind the
connection being simply they just look
similarly organized in the latent space
of the model versus a mouse brain. Which
you could say it's a decent amount of
equivocation. Another point is how the
abstraction of the hierarchical element
in HRM is purely heuristic-based. HRM is
only being interpreted to do
hierarchical reasoning over latent
space. It is not really being proven
that it's actually doing that under the
hood. So, the design could have multiple
levels of latent features, not just only
two. On top of that, HRM's training
assumes the faster inner loop has
reached a steady state, aka an
equilibrium, and computes gradients as
if it was already there. But in
practice, the loop is only run a few
times and usually hasn't settled. So,
this shortcut can misestimate the true
unrolled gradient. So, the assumption
and explanation is kind of weak to prove
that the training works in theory, well,
at least consistently work. But the
results did prove to work, so who cares?
Well, actually, this researcher called
Alexia cared a lot and wrote another
paper called TRM, short for Tiny
Recursion Model. Also fascinated by the
idea of HRM, Alexia wanted to address
these weaknesses that it has and decided
to take the matter into their own hands.
First of all, to justify the use of a
higher and a lower frequency network, a
biological analogy may not even be
needed. Alexia justified in TRM's paper
that you only need two working memories
with different rules, a higher-level
thinking space like a scratchpad and a
placeholder for answers. It's a clear
functional separation and not a
biological one. If you collapse them
into one state, the thinking scratchpad
and the answer place holder would
interfere with each other. And if you
add more states, you are basically
adding more control knobs that do not
really help on small data, and you make
learning less stable. And this is also
proven empirically in their result. So,
the logic of having the scratchpad
updates a few times first, then applying
the update to the canvas, and repeating
this process a few times is how TRM is
able to solve ARC-AGI questions. As for
addressing the assumed equilibrium in
HRM during training, TRM proposes that
there is no such thing. It trains on the
loop it actually runs. HRM pretends that
if you let its fast inner loop run long
enough, it will eventually settle into a
stable state. And then it takes
gradients as if that stable state
already exists. This assumption helps to
keep the memory low and also fits into
that two-timescale narrative, but like I
said, it may learn from the wrong
gradients. And TRM does not assume the
loop will eventually settle. Instead, it
It runs its own update loop a small
fixed number of times, and then reads
that output it actually produced on the
last real pass, and back propagates
through that. They wanted a behavior
that is to polish the canvas a few times
until it looks right. Not to pretend it
ever reaches an exact equilibrium or a
stable state to learn from. So, with
this model setup and an even smaller
model size sitting at only 7 million
parameters, which is nearly four times
smaller than HRM, it is capable of
achieving a jaw-dropping 40% on ARC-AGI
1 and 6.2% on ARC-AGI 2. This score has
beaten the likes of Gemini 2.5 Pro, O3
Pro High, and just slightly behind GPT-5
Medium, which is really crazy. And all
TRM does is that it just recursively
thinks and refine its answer. And once
it crosses the confidence threshold, it
shows you the answer. What's even cooler
is that for tasks that require less
context length, input complexity, or
expressiveness, like solving a 9 * 9
Sudoku puzzle, TRM actually performed
better without using attention and only
using MLP. But, when it gets to a maze
or ARC-AGI, which is a 30 * 30 grid,
attention-based TRM performs better
instead. An explanation proposed by
Alexia that this is because
self-attention is much better at long
context. Well, as you can see how good
LLMs are now, but MLP can still perform
better because it is still much more
generalizable and flexible, so it
actually scored higher when context
length is not too overwhelming. Another
fascinating empirical observation is
that when they tried to scale the model
up from 7 million parameters to see how
the model would perform, they found that
adding more layers did not help the
performance and increased overfitting.
On the contrary, by decreasing the
layers and increasing the recursive
process of TRM, the model was able to
perform better. So, this is why they end
up with a two-layer model instead of
four or eight layers, as two layers
somehow generalizes better. And the
difference is quite significant. 79.5%
for four layers versus 87.4% for two
layers. This is completely opposite to
what we observe in modern LLMs, where
generalization scales proportionately
with model size. A potential explanation
for this is that why larger model size
would overfit is because the training
data is scarce. So, by having a smaller
model, it is much harder to overfit when
the data set is small, which in this
case works perfectly. And by being
recursive, it solves the problem of
trying to do everything in one shot. And
as the recursion turns the job into a
sequence of small reusable edits on a
canvas, not having too many parameters
is a benefit as the model is harder to
memorize data and easier to generalize.
This result in a model that can stay
small enough to resist overfitting, yet
still has enough iterative thinking to
solve rules that a single forward pass
from a small network would miss. Pretty
cool, right? So, yeah, I am very curious
what the ceiling of recursive models can
be and how we can improve from here on.
What do you think? Let me know down in
comments. And if you like today's video,
definitely check out my newsletter where
I cover the latest research papers
weekly. On there, you'll always be up to
date on the latest research progress.
And thank you guys for watching. A big
shoutout to Spend Madge, Chris Ledoux,
Deegan, Robert Zaviassa, Marcelo
Ferreria, Proof and New, DX Research
Group, Alex, and many others that
support me through Patreon or YouTube.
Follow me on Twitter if you haven't, and
I'll see you in the next